.TH EM 1 "" "em 1.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
em \- editor for mortals (Unix v6-derived line editor)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B em
.RI [ -qeps ]
.RI [ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B em
is a line-oriented editor with a raw line editing mode (the
.BR o
command). It is based on the Unix v6 editor lineage and includes the
historical QMC extensions (prompts, screen context, and the
.BR o
command).
.PP
The raw
.B o
editor uses control keys for in-line editing and supports a built-in help
screen (command
.BR h )
via the installed emhelp file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -q
Restore default SIGHUP handling (do not ignore hangup).
.TP
.B -e
"Elfic" mode: disables explicit write commands and auto-writes on quit.
.TP
.B -p
Enable prompting.
.TP
.B -s
Silent mode (no prompts).
.PP
If the program name ends in 'm', prompts are enabled by default. Supplying
just a lone '-' also selects silent mode.
.SH COMMANDS
This editor is command-driven; use
.B h
for the built-in help screen. The
.B o
command opens a raw line editor for the current line or range. In
.B o
mode, typed characters echo immediately;
.B #
(or
.BR ^X )
removes a character with a full-line redraw for visual feedback. Use
.B ESC
or
.B ^D
to finish.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /tmp/emXXXXXX
Temporary file for the edit buffer.
.TP
.I $(datadir)/em/emhelp
Help text for the
.B h
command.
.SH BUILD
.nf
./configure
make
make install
.fi
.SH PORTERS
Prefer
.B make distcheck
before packaging. Respect DESTDIR and prefix during install.
.SH BUGS
Please report issues with a minimal reproducible example and environment
details (OS, compiler version, and terminal).
.SH HISTORY
Ken Thompson original editor. QMC modifications (Coulouris, 1976).
Modern POSIX/C99 port (2012). C23 port and tooling updates (2025).
